so
i want to now bring on amelia
and in this talk amelia winger bearskin
will present the project wampum.codes
and explore creating playful experiences
with ai
vr and sound um amelia is coming to us
from sacramento and i'm just going to
read a little introduction
her bio before we get started amelia
winger bearskin is an artist
technologist who helps communities
leverage emerging technologies to affect
positive change in the world
she's a developer evangelist at
contentful in the s
san francisco bay area she founded idea
new rochelle which partnered with the nr
mayor's office to develop
citizen focused vr and ar tools and was
awarded the 2018
bloomberg mayor's challenge one million
dollar grant to prototype their ar
citizen toolkit she's a google vr
jumpstart creator co-directing with
wendy red star
a 360 video story about native american
monsters
which was selected for a macarthur grant
through the sundance institute
native new frontiers story lab in 2018.
emilia was a professor of time-based
media art and performance
at vanderbilt university for five years
before returning to her roots in new
york city creative technology
graduating from nyu's interactive
telecommunications program in 2015.
in 2016 she went on to found and direct
the dbrs innovation lab
an applied research lab that specialized
in developing creative uses of
artificial intelligence
and machine learning technologies emilia
is also the founder of stupid hackathon
which you all were just talking about
actually in the in the little chat we
had beforehand
which now holds events around the world
she's a fellow of the sundance new
frontier story lab a sundance institute
time warner fellow
and in 2018 was awarded the end gadget
alternative realities prize for her vr
experience
your hands or feet which is the first
time i came across amelia's work with
your hands or feet i was in the studio
for collaborator sarah rothberg
and a couple more things uh in 2016 she
was part of an oculus launch pad fellow
and an artist in residence at pioneer
works
and her art is part of the permanent
collection of the guggenheim museum
the macquarie and the mccord museum
amelia is
a handanasani iroquois of the seneca
cayuga
nation of oklahoma deer clan and emilia
is founder and host of wampum.codes
podcast and the host of contentful
plus alegoria's developer podcast
dreamstacks
so without further ado here is amelia
[Music]
hello my name is amelia winger bearskin
thank you so much for having me speak
today i would like to share with you
some of my work
i am seneca cayuga nation of oklahoma
deer clan
that means i'm indigenous um on my
mother's side
and uh we are part of the iroquois or as
we like to call ourselves the hodi
noshoni
uh which are the six nation people of
the longhouse we're a confederate uh
democracy
um i would love to share with you a
little bit about my practice both with
uh a term that i've coined called
antecedent technology
and decentralized storytelling um
decentralized storytelling really comes
from the way in which
i grew up learning about my own overall
history of my culture my mom is a
traditional storyteller for our tribe
which means that she gathered and
collected the stories um
from the elders within our culture and
shared them
through performance at at uh
universities festivals museums
and also became someone who was a
scholar
and shared stories with other indigenous
people all around the world
uh when i was growing up i would perform
with her with flutes
or drums or other type of our
traditional instruments too
because our storytelling is actually
multifaceted it's
why i call it decentralized not just
because it is decentralized
within a multitude of different types of
media like uh
visual media that might take the form of
tattoos
or these same images may be on our
pottery or our beating
or on um instruments in
ceremony or objects within ceremonial
traditions
it also our storytelling is embedded in
the landscape
it's connected to nature into our
animals it's
decentralized as a strategy to make it
so that the wisdom
that we have the dependencies that are
part of this architectural code of our
community
to build a lasting peace and democracy
you need to abstract things in a way
that you can communicate
to future generations we have a concept
where anything that i'm doing now is the
result of the seven generations before
me
and anything that i do will have a
lasting impact on the seven generations
in front of me
but that also means that the information
that i learn something that i may add to
this
chain needs to be clear it needs to be
abstracted
and it needs to also contain the
multitudes of wisdom
that i have learned without corrupting
this information
right so i think of it um very much you
know since i am a technologist
i am a mozilla fellow embedded at
mit's co-creation studio with kat zizak
i'm also a developer evangelist for the
startup contentful
and my work as a technologist has helped
me also understand
that the cultural value and
contributions
indigenous people have and be able to
communicate it with other technologists
as well
if you're going to take whatever you
made in code this week maybe let's say
and communicate that to someone seven
generations in the future
what would you need to include in that
information you might need to say what
the thing you're doing is for
what its dependencies are it might need
something like a computer in order to
run
you have to explain what a computer is
to those people who made me the
technology may be so incredibly
different in the future
but really you would need to explain to
them why these things mattered and how
they're important and what types of
values
you hoped to engage with in order to
make the world a better place
so i'm going to talk to you a little bit
more about the projects that i've been
doing um
in virtual reality uh with software
development and co-creation
and also the podcast that i created
called welcome dot codes
where i interview indigenous
technologists
um about all the really amazing things
they're doing with their own communities
so
thank you very much for having me today
there is that really crazy sound effect
when the giant's leg gets shaved
that's this really strange sponge that i
bought that's the worst
sponge ever like it's so bad at
scrubbing dishes and we sat there and we
were listening to it we're like this is
this is the sound of shaving a giant's
leg this is perfect
[Music]
yes
i started out kind of my creative career
as a writer and i was
i was really interested in kind of
experimental writing that
leveraged different um aspects of new
technologies so
i got to this point where i was like
it's really fun to think about
technology and how it's impacting us but
i would really
rather be working directly with the
technologies
i went to a grad program called itp and
i learned how to code
in my last year grad school vr suddenly
came onto the scene as like
something that was going to be
accessible for us to use
you know sarah was the first person i
had met as an artist who was just
working in vr in a more playful way
we just started brainstorming and
thinking of moments
when you virtually give someone a piece
of your life like in
in daily life if i'm talking to sarah
and i'm trying to explain to her
how i felt that morning or what i was
thinking about the future
very frequently we prototype those kinds
of experiences with
sayings or with metaphors so i can say
like i walked into that room and my
stomach just dropped
or it was so like loud that i felt like
my ears were bleeding
your hands or feet is a vr experience
it's an interactive
exploration of new metaphors
the experience starts off where you're
in kind of this surreal
looking kitchen and you have in front of
you a half dozen carton of eggs and
inside of each egg is contained an
experience that has
some kind of psychologically complex
action to it that we hope
acts as something that you think back on
and you're like wow this is such a
strange feeling it kind of reminds me of
for instance like
that time that i felt like my hands were
feet i don't know i feel like
my mind is a confusing machine
what we're really doing here is we're
creating these metaphors that like maybe
don't exist but might apply in a
situation
i was like the perfect way to describe
this thing
in the beginning i started with a basic
treatment so i created a lot of 3d
assets to just sort of mock up this
world
sort of the look and feel and we came up
with this idea of having it be
like a half dozen experiences from at
you know a half
egg carton and how we would move from
each each space landing on the visuals
for any project
is an interesting process you know you
have to make something that feels true
to something that you like
but it also has to be something true to
what the other person likes
sarah said she had this amazing friend
neve bavarsky in la who was
uh illustrator we reached out to neve
and you know
showed him all of the reference imagery
showed him our very tight color palette
of what we were trying to go for
and we were like can you do the neve
version of
your hands or feet universe and then
from there we were like how are we going
to put this thing together because
translating from 2d into 3d
seems easy but to keep the same visual
style is not always so straightforward
it made a lot of sense like for us to
approach it with a style that's inviting
and not like depressing or scary but
just a little bit scary maybe
it's really helpful to like take those
two concepts
and then give it to one person that can
execute that so that it stays really
consistent
so we were like let's try this tool
medium which is a 3d
um vr sculpting tool and so we felt like
oh this is perfect that we found this
this way to find like
a slice of what we were interested in a
way that we can produce it in a really
organic and fun way and that's kind of
how we landed on the visual style that
we're at right now
a lot of our music is going to be
generative
[Music]
so generative music is when you're
really designing those
whys therefores and ifs you know
normally you listen to a song
and it's got the beginning in the middle
of the end and there's like nothing you
can do about it but in an interactive
song there's
ways that you can alter parts of it so
that way you're sort of participating
with the music every object that you
pick up
is like contains an audio track
depending on which objects you interact
with you're really flushing out what the
soundscape of that environment is
[Music]
me and sarah are doing all this work to
create a really fun playground we might
have kind of serious
concepts about the emotional resonance
behind each of the interactions which we
have
very long and engaged conversations
about like even the physicality of
grabbing that object
that action has to be connected so we
want
each of the interactions to also be
analogous to a place in time that you
might have had that feeling
when i look at it from an outside
perspective i'm like
a lot of these things have to do with
frustration
but a lot of them also have to do with
joy and feeling joy while doing
something frustrating and so i want to
give people a moment where they can
interact with that
quality of vr where they can say this is
an extension of my brain and my
experience within the world
this isn't the real world this is the
computational amalgamation
of human understanding in this world and
i want to give people an opportunity to
interact with that and interface with
that
when we explain it to people they just
get it and they're excited about it even
though it's like
oh it's like an experience where your
hands are feet because don't you ever
just
feel like a weird feeling and you don't
know how to describe it and it's
like something you've never felt before
well isn't vr the perfect way
to kind of explore that and people are
like oh yeah
that makes perfect sense and i'm like
and to film the sites where a lot of
these monsters were said to have been
seen
and throughout the process we ended up
really discovering the meaning of what a
monster is in our culture which actually
the word for
the specific type of monster we were
looking at and her tribe is also known
as
the little people or keepers of the land
and we started thinking about that
relationship
of like who is the monster and who is
a monster because they're protecting the
land and we ask people at the end of
this installation
would you be a monster with us and
the work that i've been doing this year
is within a research framework called
antecedent technology
right now i'm working on a project
called wampum.codes it's a project
with mozilla foundation a fellowship
with
embedded at mit's co-creation studio
with katsuzak
and i'm been working on the history
of wampum and and how that connects to
software development and ethics and
ethical dependencies and software
development
and i'd like to read you a little
statement that i wrote about that
if history was written by the victors
then the future will be written by the
vectors
artificial intelligence will radically
change our world our lives our planet
and it remains to be seen if it will be
a positive or a negative
if it's said that those who fail to
study history are doomed to repeat it i
would add that those who ignore
data have underfitted models when thomas
jefferson and benjamin franklin were
looking for a new model to serve as a
basis for the united states government
they were very impressed by the iroquois
confederacy we call ourselves
hodinoshoni
people of the longhouse were made up of
the seneca cayuga oneida onondaga mohawk
and tuscarora
thomas jefferson spent over a year with
us in upstate new york in one of our
largest cities
when jefferson and franklin and the
other founding fathers drafted the u.s
constitution they cherry-picked the best
parts that were most beneficial to their
own political purposes
the bits that seem to align the best
with their enlightenment era ideology
representation voting checks and
balances etc
but they left out the social and
cultural networks that sustained these
practices in the actual iroquois
confederacy
well what do they leave out in the
iroquois constitution
women clan mothers from each tribe were
the only ones who could vote
for the representative who was always a
man a chief
actually the word for clan mother and
chief is the same word
there was a balance of power only men
could serve and only women could vote
their economy was driven through complex
agricultural arrangements
everyone in the community participated
in planting and harvesting
it was not an economy of slavery
dependent
plantation agriculture
this is an example of colonial mindset i
see it i like it i want it i'll take it
i take
it and i take what will benefit my own
paradigm
but i'm unconcerned with the effect it
will have being taken out of context
and the effect it'll have on the people
i take it from this is like trying to
run a program without checking its
dependencies what if it turns out that
the confederate democracy or lasting
peace and prosperity is dependent upon a
balance of power
along gender lines or upon a different
economic model than the one practiced by
european settlers in north america
or what if it imagines a system of
agriculture where the environment is
protected and maintains
sustainable practices we all have
colonial mindset
just because our culture has colonial
mindset but here's the thing we're not
colonial subjects and we don't have to
live under a colonial empire anymore
in data science we talk about models
suffering from either overfitting or
underfitting
overfitting is when a model exhibits a
low degree of bias
but a high degree of variance in other
words it accepts a lot of differences
within the data but it doesn't have very
much predictive power
underfitting is the inverse of this high
bias low variance
this is what happens when you make a
generalization without enough data or
when the data is not diverse enough to
represent the real world
the big problem with colonial mindset is
one of underfitting
extracting idea without the context that
made that idea work
in the first place i'm here to say don't
colonize our future
our plans for the future need to include
more data from diverse cultures and
societies and not only those ideas that
flatter what we already think
for instance let's say you want to lay
the groundwork for a society run on the
blockchain
what does that look like how does that
work what are the consequences
if we don't have significant data we
might just have to wing it
but we actually have thousands of years
of data about decentralized economies
the use of wampum um among the iroquois
functioned as a decentralized
distributed ledger of contracts and it
helped us govern
govern our society for centuries wampum
is an example of what i've termed
antecedent technology and there are many
more cases like this in south america
the inca had a turing complete system of
knot tying called kipu
which predated monitored computing by
hundreds of years
when we want to use powerful new
technologies such as ai or blockchain
and we want as much data as we can to
help us imagine
positive change in the world we do not
need to throw out thousands of years of
data
that can fuel the next giant leaps our
communities will make with technology
i want people to know that indigenous
people had technologies that have solved
complex issues
i want us to use their data to help us
dream our future and i want us to
believe that just because we have had
500 years of slavery worker exploitation
poverty and gender imbalance we have had
thousands of years of peace
prosperity and equality right here in
the country where i'm standing right now
[Music]
i have there's a ton of indigenous
people working in ai
and vr and cutting edge technologies um
you know the internet has kind of a low
barrier for entry
but also it's it's really where a lot of
culture is happening right now
so um yeah so i started just talking to
my friends about the cool stuff they're
making
and also the cool stuff they're not
making because we're sheltering in place
and having
a lot of time to think about our process
and our heritage and our cultures and
i'll let you guys hear a little bit of
that
[Music]
hello i'm emilia wingerberskin the host
of wampum.codes
we are brought to you with generous
support from the mozilla foundation
and the co-creation studio at mit i
interview
native and indigenous artists activists
technologists entrepreneurs inventors
and all around cool people
and i'll let our first guest of our very
first podcast introduce herself
great yeah uh well my name is asha
viraswamy
i am an indigenous uh storyteller
creative director
and digital media producer that really
focuses
on ar vr
and xr technologies and how we
transition to those in in
the 21st century
[Music]
my name is erica tremblay or ondawayesta
is my
cayuga name and i'm super happy to be
here and talk with you today
i know i have like you know people
always ask me they're like do you know
any other native american jews and i'm
like yeah
a lot of them there's like a few i mean
uh i think it's so funny i get that all
the time too and
i grew up with a few so
it didn't seem so weird like i went to
preschool at my temple
and i feel like probably a third of my
class was like little brown jewish kids
but i also grew up in santa fe new
mexico so
that's probably where you're gonna find
the majority of uh native american jews
wampum.codes the podcast is the first
iteration of a project
that i'm outlining to develop a model of
ethical software dependencies
an attempt to inscribe community values
and developer accountability
into code the way it works is as follows
an example is in my package.json i have
wampum.codesdependency which makes it
clear that this project i have created
is free
to use and that people can only use it
and modify it in any way they want
besides closed sourcing open sourcing
already covers this use case however i
have also encoded my
own values wampum.codes
package.json dependency may look like
this
and as you can see it's formatted as a
normal json file
i've borrowed a few terms from the
domain of software development and
repurposed them to help explain how an
ethical dependency
might be structured and what kinds of
information it may contain
the following is a brief explanation of
each term and how i use them
i'm going to be writing more about this
this week and i encourage you to check
out
mozilla's fellowship blog as well as the
mit co-creation
blog for more information or you can
just go to
my website studiomelia.com and i'll have
the links there
i will have in there um a sort of mini
map
game that i've created uh inspired by
different types of design thinking maps
and impact maps that i've
created in the work that i've done with
nonprofits
this is a really long tongue he's just a
puppy um thank you so much for
for watching i hope you enjoyed it um i
would love to
talk to you and meet you sometime in
person um maybe sometime at a dog park
with my puppy cowboy
but i hope you all are doing well and
are safe and happy
uh so much love bye
sacramento and here we are with amelia
thank you for that amelia it was great
thanks so much for having me yeah my
favorite people to talk to i'm so glad
we get to talk in front of like all of
our friends
it was great seeing the behind the
scenes of
your hands or your feet i think well
first of all
i was amazed to see not amazed because
of course
but just how how a part of each part of
the project you all were like the mute
down to the music and of course the
coding and like the art you know but to
see you on the piano
and to see sarah on the guitar as well
recording the the sound for the music
was
was really cool yeah
absolutely totally i mean i started off
my career actually as an opera singer
and so
for me so many things start and sound um
i got into like people started calling
me a performance artist
i was just an opera singer composing
things with like
robots and code but that was still opera
to me
i have to dig those that that
documentation up i didn't know that
about you
yeah the first opera that i uh i
like i guess i'm one of the first offers
that i wrote that got some critical
acclaim was actually about john titor
who is an assumed time traveler
who used to look at in like the time
period of i guess like
around 1997 to 1999 something in there
he would be on all these chat forums on
the early internet saying
i'm john titor i'm a time traveler from
i think it was
2016 actually which
you know um but it was amazing so we
wrote a whole opera
based on the chat room experience of
this essentially i mean it was like a
mud or like a
dnd but it was never revealed that it
was a hoax it was always just like
this is who i am and then all these
people jumped on board and like became
part
of his story which is kind of crazy but
cyberpunk operas
that sounds really rad i i um yeah
quite actually a little bit of
experience with cyberpunk operas myself
um weird i'm surprised like if you shut
it anywhere it'd be right here
in each um
yeah there's a really cool kind of like
sense of humor
and and just and like that what i think
is interesting
all the time is when people in vr try to
create
you know like their people are striving
and spending you know
countless amounts of hours and time and
resources trying to make perfect
replicas of the real world
and it's like why they're nothing will
replace the real world so to see someone
make like to have like a very kind of
like
cartoon-esque or very kind of like
visually um
um i don't know like there's a there's a
strong
sense of aesthetic um i think of it like
judo right
like it's so hard for me to brute force
and convince you that you're in
the matrix this is the real world this
is the simulation like blow
your mind it is so easy though to do
something
totally ridiculous yeah that
destabilizes people enough where they're
just like whoa
look at this i could do this crazy thing
that i wouldn't normally do in the real
world and then you've already gotten
inside
of that playful part of them that's
willing to dream with you and if you're
trying like if you're trying as a
strategy
to make this whole real realistic world
so that you could propose an idea
that is imaginative to someone why go
through the brute force part of it why
not
start with the place they're already
willing to meet you which is like
playful new strange
weird it's weird to have a freaking
phone on your face
around that's already weird like go with
it it's like judo where you're like
you're already taking that motion and
just like helping it move forward
takes so much money i like that metaphor
a lot i was i i saw you in la
for that end gadget thing with and i was
there with kristen lucas
who was doing the flamingo yeah which
was similarly
you know it's like yeah i'll dance with
flamingos i mean of course why wouldn't
you
for sure
um but yeah also another kind another
uh question that i had um related to
this is
is um you know you've kind of like
invested a lot of time
and thinking about vr specifically as a
format
and its ability to kind of um you know
pass on
knowledge and um what's going on
with um
the health and safety of you know like
public gathering and like vr headsets in
the in the foreseeable future
did we invest in the wrong technology so
i will
i mean sure we've invested in the wrong
time to be alive
let's just say you know but i'm just
saying okay you know like
i think about vr like dreams
an interesting thing that happened when
me and sarah were testing your hands on
feed on a lot of
different you know friends and relatives
and you know
people that didn't hate us who would be
willing to try out this new experience
then i'd see them later like a couple of
months later and they'd be like oh you
know what
i i had this dream where like i was
doing this thing and i was like my hands
were feet and they're like oh wait a
minute that
no i'm sorry that wasn't a dream that
was actually that was your piece
yeah i know about this feeling and i i
started noticing it wasn't one person it
wasn't two people was so many people
started saying this to me and i really
do think that vr is like a dream
technology you're walking
without walking you're touching without
touching you're communing without
being in the same room together it's
exactly like a dream we don't need to go
into some crazy like
imagine if the matrix we already have
this thing it's already in our brain
and if you're an indigenous person this
is actually really strong part of your
culture
and part of your your myths and your
storytelling
dream technology is a gift from the
creator right it's a powerful thing
for us to create lasting peace okay so
if i think about vr that way i'm not too
concerned with its
uh marketability in an exhibition space
i think that it it's
ultimate like place where i want to use
it in my life is more like a book
or like a dream i want to be able to
have the stream space
and then i want to be able to give it to
someone else because man it's really
been
my whole life i've always had these i
mean like i'm super lucid dreamer
i haven't create incredible dreams faces
i'm not alone right like everyone has
them
but i would love for someone to say like
i just want to take you into my dream i
want us to have
you together i want you to dream with me
or for me to be in a space
of a dream world and for you to be in a
space and then we can look at each other
and talk at that level that is so
powerful and
this concept of communal dreaming really
comes up in a lot of cultures
and that's i think the real power of it
so i'm less concerned about like
using a headset after a thousand people
at an exhibition hall and more
interested in how we can create and
maybe it's not vr but how can we create
more technology
that helps us dream together and it's
okay that i don't dream in my bed with
every single person i know
yeah thank you for that reminder
actually yeah i'm always also
in that colonial mindset of of
uh of of technology but yeah it's a it's
a good reminder just
just to realize that it is just a
powerful tool for storytelling and
and co-dreaming i like that idea
yeah i like that i like that um
antidote that you shared with us also
about your friend thinking it was
actually one of their dreams
right and i think there's something
special in that piece about
archetypes and sort of the way that
you're playing with language in that
work
which is something that we all identify
with in this very core way but it's also
a visceral piece for me
and i saw it for the first time in the
studio with sarah rothberg in brooklyn
actually maybe the theme space where you
were working
so yeah but but the audio and that work
and i think the sponge example at the
beginning like where you can really feel
that which
runs your fingers on that sponge but
it's such a visceral part of that
piece and you know that's how you all
started this conversation too was
talking about sound
um so talk talk to us a little bit more
about storytelling and sound
and how the audio elements of that like
bring forth that that sense of dreaming
um and really elicit those sort of
things about us that are so human
and innate uh you know when i first
started being a
um when i was like an artist rather than
a
than a opera singer i started having my
first exhibitions in museums
the people who are the attendants of my
installations and my video pieces i
would like walk in and they would give
me this stink eye
and usually people are like at museums
they're like somewhat nice to you
they're like oh this is very close
they would just look at me like and it
was like oh it took me a little minute
before i realized like
when my professor said that sound is the
most fascist being yet like what they
meant like hearing
video sound of whatever i did for like
eight hours a day
for two months or whatever they like
wanted to kill me
so i started it sound is so powerful and
it's like i never have
uh discounted that it's always a
strategy for me and sometimes it's a
strategy that can be like overused or
you can learn like okay maybe i don't
want to have like
videos on repeat with sound and i've
become a lot more
aware of the power of it um i think an
offer we're used to like you're only
gonna be there for like three to five
hours which is still a long time but
like
it's not like eight hours a day um and
so
you know when i i've created this this
band when i was in new york
um called lullabies for ai and while i
was the director of this machine
learning lab
and actually the people in the machine
learning lab were also in this band
called little viceroy
and the reason i guess for needing that
is we needed a space where we could both
do the work of technology and like make
it and so i mean it barely made sense
but it made sense in the sense that we
could be like this machine learning
algorithm
is training on sheet music and is
generating sheet music this is like
makes a little bit more linear sense
then we needed a band where we could
tell the stories
that we imagined are not encapsulated in
data that don't exist
in the kind of data lakes that we were
using to train our models on
that we hoped if if we are really
our goal is to create some type of um an
ai that reflects
our culture or if it just at the bare
minimum
understands what humans need and help
hopefully lets us survive right
we are like how do we communicate that
and so we started thinking about what
do you do with a human child you know
you sing lullabies to them you tell them
stories you do all these things you hope
in the very early stages of their life
can can at least teach them what you
need
as well right and i think we do the same
thing like with our animals as well we
have to be like okay you can bite each
other like that but like i have skin and
not fur and like
you know so we want to do the same kind
of thing with how we think about the
technology that we're building how do we
embed
the humanness that isn't explicit within
our database structures and has been
left out either
through ignorance of mission or on
purpose right
um you're someone i look up to in terms
of their of like a
level of understanding about the need
for support in artists communities and
and and so you i know that you know we
were talking
years ago now about idea rochelle
and that that residency you cultivated
there
as as an organizer you know what are
institutions you know needing to do
better what what is something that
that idea rochelle did that you think
added to that conversation of support
you know
with other artists yeah thank you so
much for that question tommy i mean i'm
i'm very interested in
in looking at life cycles and death
cycles right like seeing
at what point in which the the culture
that you're trying to create
can have the most impact and if you can
understand the whole life cycle you can
see
where in that life cycle you can make
impact and then
understanding at what point you are no
longer valuable and
and and designing within the structure a
natural death cycle and i think that's
something
you know we don't do in software you
don't do it in organizations we're just
like oh i'm going to make this kind of
impact
forever and nothing will ever outgrow
this or i'll iterate and i'll just
change and change and change and change
but like that's actually not how our
natural world works like we have a dust
cycle we have the ability
to transform so radically like i mean my
body will transform so radically in a
thousand years that it won't look
anything like me so it doesn't make any
sense for me to say oh i iterated past
my you know human form like that's not
no i died
right then so i think that's important
too to understand where
where our boundaries and our limits are
as a as a
as a support structure for artists where
am i no longer going to be helpful and
knowing that keeps us real
that is so cool yeah i'm like yeah
i shouldn't say it on on air here about
my death cycle i mean i'm not i don't
want you to die tommy but sometimes
my non-profit death cycle yeah
i think i think non-profits and and
cultural institutions are experiencing
you know a death cycle here and but
whether that's
you know artificial or not it's another
question i think that's
an interesting conversation
yeah and barry says rebirth cycle in the
chat absolutely there
you know that me too right like a total
rebirth
also like giving over something to
another group being like i
created this so that this group could do
something now maybe it's their turn to
then move forward and i've had a couple
you know i'm always interested in
helping
um indigenous youth and and figuring out
in my life how i can make the most
impact to help indigenous youth
and i've worked with other people who
are like i used to have run a nonprofit
where i helped indigenous youth and now
i want to help an indigenous person
help conditions you and i'm like that's
pretty awesome that like you knew that
and you timed that in your life and
you're like i've done this for five
years
and now it's actually time for me to me
not to be the leader and now i'm gonna
help someone else
that's pretty cool
should we take uh i was just
i was just checking i was just checking
out an audience question so it might
just be a second or two before we get
something in here
um but you know i think that one of the
things that amelia and i were talking
about ahead of time too is
threading together some of the work and
we just saw morrison's work and we were
having conversations in the lounges and
this idea of um cultural storytelling
right
and you talked a little bit about in the
presentation decentralized storytelling
and i wonder if you can just talk a
little bit more about
that for you and your practice
absolutely thank you for that question
um and i was asked on monday i was i
gave a talk at the
hammerman center for technology at
connecticut college and someone asked me
what does decentralization mean and i
remembered in that moment that you know
i use
frequently terms from my you know
sort of like hacker technology universe
um
you know my cyberpunk opera background
right um in order to
explain parts about my indigenous
culture and i do that because i'm a
technologist and artist right so i'm
kind of like trying to translate as a
bridge between these two
groups and so i said you know i didn't
invent the term decentralization
i know you both know that's your
technologist but i i'm like i wanted to
take that same idea
which was really an ethos that was in
the early you know
periods of the internet where people
were saying what if we were a
decentralized network
of nodes what if we had communication
systems that were not
centralized through a government utility
or through
an enormous corporation and and that
that like ethos hasn't actually gone
away maybe it's gotten smaller maybe
it's gotten bigger but it's still a call
to action that a lot of technologists
resonate with and i'm like you know that
thing is really
similar to something that existed before
colonization
and so maybe it's not a new idea but
it's a calling back
to something that's really true on this
soil like that idea maybe
came from this soil and maybe it's
because it has always been here right
we tell us a little bit about this um
this project or work you're doing with
with media lab sure yeah wampum.cod so
the reason i use the phrase wampum is
wampum is
a type of a shell that we have in our
culture it's it's binary it's purple or
it's white
and we make beads into it that are
purple or white and we use them in order
to record decentralized contracts of
agreements
that are created through storytelling
based consensus
and we weave them into something called
a wampum belt our
great law of peace which is our
constitution was made into one of these
wampum belts
and thomas jefferson and george
washington actually made their own
wampum belt
after living with our tribe and learning
with them for about a year
to show that they understood our system
of contract building and consensus
but even from the very beginning you
could see that our wampum belt is like
uh the great uh tree of pieces in the
middle and then each of the nodes that
comes out of it
are squares that represent each of the
tribes and theirs
was in the middle was a house and then
each node that came off and represented
a singular man
so it's like so different right even
from the very they're like we understand
the wampum part
we understand the weaving part but they
like missed the whole decentralized
communalism
which is interesting to and the center
of being on nature
so it was like very interesting even
they're like we got it we're like oh so
close you know
but it so that's a wampum part and then
the part that i'm doing with um with mit
is i'm doing this podcast where i'm
interviewing indigenous technologists
and
in co-creating these ideas and gathering
this wisdom
that i hope to turn into it's it's an
idea for how you could embed
explicitly your values and ethics into
your software
so um you know i use the exam example of
like a package
uh json where you say these are all the
dependencies that this software package
needs to run
what if one of those dependencies was
what i might the ethics i believe need
to exist
for this software to function right now
the only ethical decision that i can
make is do i use like the
new license do i use the mit license or
do i close source that
that's based on copyright law it's not
even based on values
or ethics it does have values and ethics
in it because the law
is something that contains our values
and ethics but how do i make my
own values and ethics explicit that are
based in the consensus-based community
so that's the project i'm doing
really cool yeah you actually mentioned
you said this word blockchain
in your in your video and i was like
well i haven't heard that word in a year
yeah and i heard it like every day
a year ago and now and now but but but
but this idea of wampum
has has transcended you know
even an erasure of people of indigenous
peoples
um by by this by our
by this people um by the united states
they're just interesting to kind of see
that that idea
you know well i'd like to say that if
the constitution was
made after the iroquois confederacy our
matrilineal matriarchal confederate
democracy
and then it was it was you know forked
and a new version was created the source
code has something valuable and maybe we
just have some malware we need to like
i like that idea
well any questions feel free to um
to chat in the chat yeah i'm checking
out the
q a right now to see if we happen to
yeah
you can also find me on twitter i'm at
amelia wb
um happy to answer your questions later
on
um so the uh
you know there's like a sense of humor
that is that is
you know felt in in um your hands your
feet
i think you know that is like reminds me
a lot of like maybe things in the stupid
hackathon
that you co-created with sam levine can
you tell us a little bit about about
that project
yeah totally um i think my favorite
phrase ever
to have happened out of the stupid
hackathon is
on hacker news like the one day we were
like the number one thing trending on
hacker news someone was like
who gave you permission to do this yeah
and me and sam were like
we're upset really quiet and they're
just crazy
right right did we disgrace and they
were like what do you get some kind of
certificate or something that lets you
just decide that you could stupidly
hack so we of course made this
certificate obviously and you can
download it
but i loved that idea of like who gave
you permission
and yeah i i guess i'm very proud that
we gave people permission to do
something stupid when it comes to
technology whereas other people have
been doing it without permission
you know i i just i you know i think
that it is true that sometimes you just
need a container
and then you can say hey people fill
this up and you get
some really real feelings about the
world that they're immersed in
you kind of have to say to people do you
know that we're inside of the ocean
and we're swimming it and the other fish
are like okay
yeah i got feelings about this ocean you
know and so i i feel like that's what
the stupid hackathon was it was really a
space where
people were given permission to talk
about
the weird things they were noticing and
they said well it's it's not fair
because in the stupid hackathon you're
allowed to talk about sexism and
racism and stupid things and we were
like
yeah yeah i guess
what are some of the highlight projects
that came out of that
is it is it over a couple days or
something
yeah well usually we always have the
stupid hackathon one day
you came there in the morning and you
and like the only parameter really is
that you had to make something that
quote-unquote worked like it did a thing
like if if its goal was
to take soylent and make it pink and
then charge twice the price so that it
was like you know pinkified soylent
if it did that then like that's that
that that work like
a thing that you said was gonna happen
happen that's like kind of the whole
parameter and we would give
sort of um like buckets of categories as
ways that people could think
about these uh these stupid stupid
stupid ideas
um and you know some of the categories
would just be simple where they'd be
like the internet of things
like isn't that already kind of stupid i
don't know like you know just kind of
say these ideas and people would make
incredible things and
a lot of people would say this is the
very first time i've ever engaged with x
technology but i was afraid to because i
didn't know what to do but you know
everyone knows how to make something
that's
stupid and no one needs and is a
terrible idea
you know but but it's and we didn't set
off to make it
uh necessarily a political commentary
but people felt safe that they could do
that
and and i'm really proud of that and the
fact that we we never had less than 50
women and female identifying people in
our hackathons and
actually that's one other hackathon
which will remain nameless on the stream
tried to sue us and saying that they did
us a ish
i won't say the name but like a funny
hackathon before us which they actually
didn't they did it two years after us
and that we should stop doing ours and
the reason we should stop doing ours is
because people had criticized them
for having like 90 men and only men with
the mic and only men leadership
and we were making them look bad and i
was like well that's stupid
yeah there's still some really awful
people in this world
it's really sad but yeah i don't know i
think
like i i think the easiest way to get
more diverse people in a hackathon is to
you know do it with them because they're
your friends
and to give them the mic and let them do
what they want to do
yeah diversity is is a really big
problem for
for some people were like or like uh
it's really challenging for people to
imagine
um a world where you know creators don't
look like them or
they really just they're they're lazy
they're they're they're not
you know they're not doing their
homework they're not
making friends that aren't white yeah no
i told them i said why don't you just
give
uh one of your friends who's a woman the
mic and then she can leave the hackathon
and they were like
we don't really know
[Laughter]
so we do have a question from the
audience and they just want to hear you
talk more about music and sound so
the question is over here in the in the
sidebar
um talking about speaking to metaphors
to bring visuals in the vr experience
how do you approach uh metaphors and
music and sound as well in this process
yeah i mean you know there and i think
sarah touched a little bit on it in the
video
this kind of concept of seeds and sems
or if you're thinking about it as a
logic tree that you have like
branches and then you have other leaves
that come off of those branches which is
just
kind of your basic way of of thinking of
um something that's
like fractal-like or generative or
algorithmic can help you design
something that's still
very deep and meaningful it doesn't have
to just be like
you know oh i don't know just a midi
variable from 100 and it'll map to this
thing i don't care
right and we've all kind of experienced
that kind of generative music and you're
like
oh i wave my hand and things happen but
if i wave my hand in a different way
well similar things happen that i can't
actually notice the difference
that's you know that's not that's not as
enough feedback i think that we have
such
developed senses of sound and sensuality
and pleasure
around music that i think it becomes a
lot of fun because
rather than writing a song once i can
write a song a hundred times and do all
of the sort of variations
and then you my incredible viewer gets
to be a part of the central world that i
built and i think it's super fun for me
as a creator to build those spaces but i
also you know i'm like very critical
when i go in spaces i want to feel that
too i want to feel like
my presence has touched this in such a
way and that i think is the closest
thing we can do to mirror that
live experience when i am singing on
stage for a group of 100 people like i
am so with them like our atoms
are our every bit of our bodies are
vibrating together
and they are a part of this music as
much time we are actually creating it in
this moment that's my
cue our sidekicks can we break
down he's uh chewing on a squeaky toy
because like i'm making a sound always
better with buddies
thank you so much for your time today
amelia we really appreciate you being a
part of radical simulation
love this chat i'm glad you two got a
chance to also reconnect
with me love you tommy yeah i love you
too come back and
see us yeah um and just before
cut um for the day i wanna um just
prepare our audience as we move into our
evening portion